
Collaborative AI (CSE3210): Negotiation Practical Assignment
Pradeep K. Murukannaiah
Interactive Intelligence, Delft University of Technology February 22, 2026
Table 1: Deliverables and Deadlines

Deliverable	Deadline	Notes	Weight

Top scoring reports will describe in detail the challenge that the agent faces, and the design of the strategy implemented.

Implementation and Group Report

March 27, 2026

They will present qualitative and quantitative analysis of the agents performance based on multiple criteria and ne- gotiation scenarios, and will show evidence that related lit- erature has been read, understood and applied.

30%




Contents
1 Introduction	3
2 The Assignment	3
2.1 Negotiation Setup	3
2.2 The NegMAS Framework	3
2.3 Assignment in Steps	3
2.4 Analyzing the Performance of Your Agent	4
2.5 Ethics and Plagiarism	4
2.6 Open Science	4
3 Submission Details	4
3.1 Deliverables	4
3.2 Report	5
3.3 Requirements	5
3.4 Submission	6
3.5 Individual Contributions	6
4 Evaluation	6
5 Automated Negotiating Agents Competition (ANAC)	7
6 Future Perspectives	7


1 Introduction
Negotiation is a form of interaction in which a group of agents with conflicting interests strive to reach an agreement over an outcome [1, Chapter 4]. Negotiation is fundamental to collaborative AI because often agents cannot fully accomplish their objectives on their own and need to exchange resources with each other. In this practical assignment, you will create your own negotiating agent in the NegMas framework. This document provides the outline of the assignment, pointers to the literature that you can use as background information, links to the negotiation platform that we will use for this assignment, and usual information on
deadlines, where to get help, how to submit your files, and so on.
For theoretical concepts, please refer to the handbooks on negotiating agents [2, 3].

Learning Objectives  After completing this practical assignment, you should have learned to:
ï Apply theories and techniques from multi-agent negotiation, including utility theory, preference mod- eling, communication protocols, strategy modeling, and opponent modeling.
ï Create a negotiating agent in the NegMas framework.
ï Analyze the performance of your agent quantitatively and qualitatively.
ï Describe the design and implementation of your agent concisely in a group report.

2 The Assignment
2.1 Negotiation Setup
The negotiation will run using the NegMas framework and the setup is based on the rules from the Inter- national Automated Negotiating Agents Competition (ANAC). It will be a bilateral negotiation between two agents, using the Stacked Alternating Offers Protocol (SAOP). Negotiations are conducted using various multi-issue preference domains, which are described by additive weighted utility functions.
   An agent will not have any knowledge of its opponent's preferences. The agents have reservation values (the utility received by the agents when no agreement is achieved). Reservation values of agents can be different and an agent does not know the reservation value of its opponent. Finally, there will not be any discounting (i.e., the discounting factors are set to 1).

2.2 The NegMAS Framework
In this assignment, you will use NegMas, a python library for developing negotiation agents in a simulation environment. To get started, install the latest stable version of NegMas (which is NegMAS 0.15.1.post1 as of this writing). You can use Python version 3.10|3.11|3.12|3.13|3.14 as indicated in the document; however, we recommend using Python 3.13 as that is the version we have tested. The documentation also includes tutorials, e.g., on running a negotiation, developing a new negotiator, and running a tournament.

2.3 Assignment in Steps
1. Develop an agent to negotiate in the setup above.
2. Experiment and evaluate your agent by running several negotiations (e.g., in tournaments).
3. Analyze the performance of your agent. See Section 2.4 for details.
4. Write a report. See Section 3.2 for details.
   There are many techniques to improve the negotiation strength of your agent. Various factors can be taken into account when deciding on acceptance, breaking off, or computing a next offer in a negotiation. For example, you can take into account the time an opponent takes to reply with a counter offer, the consistency of an opponent's offers, the concession rate of your opponent, and possibly other considerations about the domain of negotiation itself.

2.4 Analyzing the Performance of Your Agent
How well does your agent perform and how generic is it? That is, does your agent perform well against other agents? And, does it work as well on multiple domains? To verify this, have your agent negotiate against itself, and against as many other agents you can find and in as many domains you can find. You can also experiment with the agents of other groups in your class if the groups are willing to collaborate (of course, without plagiarizing each other's code). If you collaborate with other groups, explicitly name and thank these groups in your report. Report on the outcomes reached. Try to explain why the outcome is as it is.
   We want to emphasize that it is important to test your agent in order to improve the negotiation strength of your agent in different settings. Important: Do not assume that your goal is to outperform a 'stupid' agent. Test your agent against as many agents as you can and older versions of your own agent.
   Think carefully on the criteria that you set to judge the performance of your agent. In normal negotiations, a good outcome is determined by criteria such as the efficiency of the outcome. That is, how close is the outcome to the Pareto frontier? How close is it to the Nash Product? Does it optimize Social Welfare?

2.5 Ethics and Plagiarism
We expect from our students that they adhere to the ethical standards of TU Delft, which includes that the work you submit is that of your group only, and you only collaborate with other groups or people in as far as is explicitly allowed by the assignment. In particular, the following behaviors are strictly prohibited:
ï Designing an agent in such a way that it benefits some specific other agent.
ï Hacking or exploiting bugs in the software.
ï Communicating with the agent during time it is being evaluated by the teaching team.
   Both the agent source code and the report need to be your own work. For the agent, you can use the code from example agents provided, but anything else needs to be clearly acknowledged in the report and when submitting your work. Note that you are not allowed to directly use code programmed by others, including agents who have previously participated in the international competition. However, you are allowed to use ideas and strategies reported in academic papers, as long as you implement these strategies yourselves and you acknowledge the papers in your report. In case of doubt, feel free to ask! This is important as violations, deliberate or otherwise, will be reported.

2.6 Open Science
Please realize that your agent and its description may be made open source with your permission. Regardless of that, we expect our students to come up with non-offensive material according to TU Delft standards that is suitable for sharing with the scientific community.

3 Submission Details
3.1 Deliverables
ï You should deliver a zip file containing your report, and the source code of your project. Your group number N should be clearly stated in every document and every file you submit. The assigned group number is the number of your group on Brightspace. Your end report should list the names of the group members.
ï You should name your negotiating agent as GroupN_Negotiator.
ï Your submission should include all source files (and only source files, not compiled files) and any resource files (e.g., text files with settings or data) that you created.

3.2 Report
The report should be five pages or less (excluding references) in the IJCAI submission format. Five pages is a strict upper limit. You may be able to produce a lot of results, but often it is easy to combine these results. Further, it is also important to select the main messages that you want to convey.
   The report should include an explanation and motivation of all of the choices made in the design of negotiating agent. The report should also help the reader to understand the organization of the source code (important details should be commented on in the source code, too). This means that the main methods used by your agent should be explained in the report. In particular, you should include:
ï A high-level description of the agent and its structure, including the main Python methods (mention these explicitly!) used in the negotiating agent implemented in the source code.
ï An explanation of the negotiation strategy, decision function for accepting offers, any important preparatory steps, and heuristics that the agent uses to decide what to do next.
ï A section documenting the strong and weak points of your agent, the tests you performed to analyze (and improve) the negotiation strength of your agent. You must include scores of various tests over multiple sessions that you performed. Describe how you set up the testing situation and how you used the results to modify your agent, and motivate why you choose these testing methods, metrics, or graphs. See Section 2.4 for more information.
ï Cover all the points of Section 2.3.


3.3 Requirements
ï The agent should implement a negotiation strategy to generate offers, and an acceptance strategy to decide whether to accept an offer or not.
ï The agent must aim at the best negotiation outcome possible, while taking into account that it may need to concede to the other agents.
ï Show how your agent takes the preferences of the other agents into account.
ï The agent meets reasonable time and memory constraints. Any agent that uses more than a minute in order to initiate the negotiation or to reply to an opponent's offer will be disqualified.
ï Make sure your agent at least works with linear additive profiles.
ï The source code should contain explanatory comments that will allow people not involved in program- ming the code to understand it. A clear explanation of a method must be provided at the beginning of important methods. Parts of the code that are not self-explaining should receive additional docu- mentation. Please incorporate enough information in comments in the code to ensure this. Finally, make sure that you have removed all debug printouts from your code and that your agent does not unnecessarily burden the servers.
ï Your code should be tested to ensure that it works on multiple operating systems, and requires nothing other than the files contained in your group's submission.
ï The submission should include all the elements listed in Section 3.1.

3.4 Submission
By March 27, 2026, each group should deliver two files: (1) your report as a PDF file, and (2) a zip file of your project, following the structure and naming convention described in Section 3.1. Do not submit incomplete assignment solutions; only a complete assignment solution containing all deliverables will be accepted. In case of any problems, please contact us well in advance of the deadline.

3.5 Individual Contributions
At the end of the report, you must describe how each member of the team contributed to the project. This part of the report is not counted in the five page limit. However, we would like concise description of the contributions. We will seek additional details if necessary.

4 Evaluation
Evaluation is based on your implementation and report. Table 2 shows an indicative grading scheme.
Table 2: Grading scheme showing indicative grades for different aspects of your report. If your report is completely missing information on a category, you receive zero points for that category

Category (weight)	Sample feedback	Grade


Structure and Writing (5%)

The report does not follow a proper layout and structure and contains many spelling and/or grammar mistakes
The report conforms with the requirements, and contains few/no spelling and grammar mistakes

1-6

6-10

The agent description is inadequate/missing	1-6

Description and Understanding (20%)
Literature (10%)

The agent is explained but some parts are incomplete; and, not all design choices are motivated
The agent is explained and mostly complete; design choices are well motivated; shows a good level of understanding
There are some references to the literature but it is not clear how these references are used to inform the strategy of the agent
There is clear evidence that the literature was read and under- stood, and used to motivate and support the development of the agent strategy

6-8

8-10

1-6

6-10

The strategy is very basic and shows no originality	1-6

Sophistication and Originality (25%)
Evaluation and Analysis (40%)

The strategy is based on existing literature and has been adapted to show some innovation
The strategy has many novel and sophisticated elements, e.g., mixing ideas from several papers
There is some evaluation of the agent performance, showing tables and graphs, but little/no analysis of the results
There is an adequate evaluation and some discussion of the results but little/no critical evaluation or ways to improve the agents
The evaluation is extensive considering various metrics and bench- marks, and there is an excellent critical discussion of the perfor- mance of the agent, and ways to overcome the deficiencies and improving the agent

6-8

8-10

1-6

6-8

8-10




5 Automated Negotiating Agents Competition (ANAC)
Did you like thinking about efficient negotiating strategies, or implementing a successful negotiating agent? You can enter in the international Automated Negotiating Agents Competition (ANAC) in 2025 which will be colocated with the International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI) to be held in Bremen, 15th to 21st August, 2026. The task and the negotiation platform in the competition (see [4] for example) may be different from those in this assignment. However, the ideas you use in this assignment can be easily developed further for ANAC. If you are interested in this, we would like to help you. You could join a writing team on the scientific aspects of this assignment. Please ask the teachers about this. Student teams that submitted their agent after this assignment have received prizes in the competition (and won $1000 in 2011 and 2013) and were awarded student scholarships to attend international conferences to present their agent.

6 Future Perspectives
Negotiation has become a major and interesting research area within Artificial Intelligence. Negotiation is important in many domains ranging from business applications such as Internet market places to incident and crisis management. Negotiation is one of the main tools an autonomous agent has to agree about a course of action or to resolve conflicts with other agents.
   The agents in the negotiation environment have limited capabilities in order to achieve a negotiated deal. What extensions would be required to use your agent in real-life negotiations to support (or even take over) negotiations performed by humans? Can you think of additional capabilities (e.g., other actions or forms of communication) for your agent that would make it more practical and help achieve better deals?
There are many angles that you can take:
ï Design of negotiation strategies and better opponent models (using machine learning techniques);
ï Design of a negotiation support system, either advising humans in a particular domain, or even taking over negotiation all together;
ï Design of richer negotiation protocols, such as protocols allowing for partial bids, use a form of com- munication between the agents, auctions;
ï Design and add explanation facilities for negotiation support systems or negotiating agents;
ï Design and implement agents that can handle non-linear utility functions;
ï Design self-learning agents that improve their negotiation strategies with experience;
ï Research related to negotiation, trust and the reputation of agents, either cognitively motivated or viewed from a more engineering point of view;
   ï Research on negotiation and culture. How does culture influence negotiation between different agents?
This can all be combined with a literature survey in order to kick-start your research project (e.g., an MSc thesis a year later). If you are interested, don't hesitate to ask us.

Acknowledgement
Thanks to Enrico Gerding and Tim Baarslag for sharing their negotiation assignments. This assignment builds on their ideas. We would also like to thank the Teaching Assistants of Collaborative AI course for providing comments on this assignment as well as testing and debugging the platform.

References
[1] Gerhard Weiss. Multiagent Systems. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 2013.
[2] Catholijn M. Jonker, Reyhan Aydogan, and Tim Baarslag. Negotiating agents. Brightspace (Resources and Tools), 2021.
[3] Dave de Jong. Introduction to automated negotiation. https://www.iiia.csic.es/~davedejonge/intro_to_ nego/, 2026.
[4] ANAC. Automated negotiating agents competition (ANAC): Automated negotiation league. https:
//web.tuat.ac.jp/~katfuji/ANAC2026/, 2026.


